[Music]
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson we're shooting today in Fiesole
a town in the hills above Florence Italy
associate editor of The Spectator
Douglas Murray writes for a number of
publications including the Wall Street
Journal mr. Murray is the author of a
number of books including the strange
death of Europe which appeared in 2017
and the madness of crowds gender race
and identity which will appear this
coming September Douglas Murray welcome
it's very pleasure to be with you the
strange death of Europe I quote Europe
is committing suicide or at least its
leaders have decided to commit suicide
whether the European people choose to go
along with this is naturally another
matter close quote we'll come to your
argument in a moment but the book
appeared in 2017 for now what do you
make of what the people are willing to
put up with two years after you
published the book it's very interesting
and in the two years since it came out
as being coming out in I think it's now
out in every European language so I've
been pretty constant now in a different
country every week in Europe and
elsewhere and so I get a pretty good
sense of where things are I would say
there's several things that the
direction of travel hasn't changed but
some of those in positions of power have
done things that I was surprised they
would be willing to do to slow it down
I'm thinking particularly of the fact
that the book centers on the migration
crisis of 2015 which I just see as a
sped-up version of something that have
been happening for decades but since
2015 the European leaders among other
things did a deal with President Kaley
Ferra and you know he now has a gun to
europe's head that he knows he can fire
at any point the point that i'm going to
have to stop you from time to time to
make sure that for an american audience
were very explicit iran is president of
turkey and the nature of the deal was we
Europeans pay him huge sums of money and
he stops boats leaving the Turkish
shores for Greek island
right and it is just as crude and
straightforward as her he's not doing it
out of a kindness of his heart right and
things like that have undoubtedly meant
that the flow of 2015 has slowed I mean
the boats are still setting off from the
North African coastline but nothing like
the rate of 2015 so there have been some
things like that that have surprised me
all right little e out the basic
argument so you're not concerned with
any kind of temporary European melees or
questions of slow economic growth which
is a lot of what we hear on the other
side of the big water again I'm quoting
you Europe today has little desire to
reproduce itself fight for itself or
even take its own size in an argument by
the end of the lifespans of most people
currently alive in Europe Europe will
not be Europe and the peoples of Europe
will have lost the only place in the
world we had to call home close quote
two years later you you stand but that's
a very dramatic statement two years
later you stand by that oh absolutely
yes in the lifespans of as I say most
people it would be a different place it
already is and I lay some of that out in
a most 'less detail in the strange death
of Europe sometimes when things happen
relatively slowly people get used to
things they adapt I give the example of
the census in the UK the last census in
the UK which showed that in 23 out of 33
London boroughs people who identify as
white British are in the minority in
though its boroughs so that that in the
lifespan of em you can either you know
like that dislike it or feel so when
lying about it but that's a massive
change in just one person's lifespan
already John Cleese tweeted as we tape
this it was I think was last week John
Cleese of Monty Python Fame tweeted
London no longer seems to be an English
city if I think that's a close yes close
paraphrase if not a quotation and he was
attacked words well the attack as
attacks are on Twitter yeah but he was
correct
he was correct I mean by the way factual
occurred what he said is effectively
what he's boasted about by politicians
including the mayor of London and the
previous mayor of London they say you
know it's an international city they're
very happy about that but if somebody
says well that means it's not an English
city anymore
then they attack somebody like whether
John Cleese me or whoever for heresy and
it's very interesting by the way isn't
it I mean John Cleese was was attacked
for the heresy of Life of Brian what 40
years ago he's attacked by the clerics
now just said the clerics of the far
left and the social justice movements
and so on they just happened not to wear
frocks like his previous critics but
it's the same phenomenon I've debated
and discussed these issues for years now
and I know every one of the moves that
people do the number of dishonest moves
things like that's not the case okay
that is the case that is the case but
you shouldn't say it or that is the case
and it's great suck it up so to continue
with the basic argument this has come
about this death of Europe or the death
of you this has come about quote because
of two simultaneous concatenation 'he's
from which it is now all but impossible
to recover the first is the mass
movement of people's into Europe close
quote so explain that 20 explain 2015
and tell us what that was what happened
in 2015 remind us and that was a
speeded-up version of what well again
you're talking to a largely American
audience here so fill us in in the
aftermath of the Second World War most
Western European countries decided that
they wanted to invite migrant labour in
to help rebuild the beginning the idea
was that they wouldn't stay they would
come and then they'd go home after doing
the job unsurprisingly they did stay
these large proportions of them did and
gradually people started to be brought
in even if there weren't jobs on to go
to so for instance you imported large
numbers of people from the Indian
subcontinent to middle towns in the
north of England when there were no
mills anymore and then and the thinking
on that was I'm not sure there was very
much thinking it was what we call a
cock-up view of history a succession of
lazy and cowardly politicians who just
found it easier to kick this one down
the road and leave it to their
successors to deal with we kept changing
the story of what we were doing as we as
we were doing it I recount in the book
we moved from the guest worker period to
the multicultural period where you said
yeah live in our country and sort of
pretty much do what you like to the
modern one which is become like us those
are three totally different things in
the course again of one person's life
and I blame no migrant for being
confused by that because we were
confused but in 2015 the movement got to
its height of total unregulated movement
and this was the year in which it
started off in the beginning of this
decade we're in partly people coming
fleeing Syrian civil war but then people
from all across sub-saharan Africa North
Africa the Middle East the Far East and
I started traveling to the camps in
southern Europe where people were
arriving in I've been to many of the
countries they were fleeing from and it
was a veritable United Nations of people
now in the eyes of some of the
governments and many of the public it
was all people fleeing the Syrian civil
war but it wasn't it wasn't even by the
EU zone figures at least 60 percent 6-0
percent of the arrivals in 2015 had no
more right to be in Europe than anyone
else in the rest of the world so an
ankle of Merkel invited a million
refugees refugees was migrants migrants
let's call them lagers when she invited
a million of them into Germany this is
crude for I'll put it badly you sharpen
up what I'm about to say because this is
the emitter where an American would look
at it the Germans are still acting in
some way or another out of a sense of
war guilt oh that's it that's
straightforward oh the obscene
straightforward I mean I no doubt about
it this is a job for a psychiatrist in
many ways look at the reception Munich
station as 10,000 people are arriving
every 48 hours or so at the height of
the movement in 2015 they were coming up
through the Balkans and up through
Central Europe and there were crowds at
Munich train station high-fiving the
arrivals given them balloons teddy bears
and what was it it's perfectly obvious
it was Germans it
at the sight of people breaking into
their country rather than trying to
break out right so but even at that even
if it was a kind of act of German
self-indulgence and act on acting out of
work yield the whole argument was that
these people were unfortunate that they
were fleeing civil war and you're saying
that 60% of them simply weren't a lot
more than the 60% I mean what you get
into in all of the issues with migration
is and specifically European migration
is people find it incredibly hard to
know where you salami slicer issues so
for instance they say yes we'll have
people coming in who are genuinely
fleeing a Syrian civil war for instance
right well there's an argument about
that as well you can look after 100
Syrians in a neighboring country for
everyone you look after in Europe so
it's not efficient in all sorts of ways
whether or not it's humane but let's say
that yes okay people freeing Syrian
civil war then you have the people
including the aid agencies and making
the point well and one Afghan refugee
made this to me to my face you said
Syrians have only been at war for five
years we've been at war for 15 years why
should they have priority very good
question so you go along that and then
you get to the thing that all of the aid
agencies and the NGOs and others have
been doing for years which use you
allied and rub out the difference
between people fleeing war and people
fleeing economic deprivation right now
one of the reasons why I'm quite tough
about this is because I know whether
argument leads Gallup last year did a
poll in sub-saharan Africa 1/3 of
sub-saharan Africans want to move
they're not going to go to Saudi Arabia
they're not planning to break into Yemen
they want to come to Europe now in my
view that the catastrophe underlying all
of this is the presumption that every
country in the world is basically a
country for the people of that country
apart from Europe and Europe is a place
for the wild alright a few figures from
the book even as I was reading the
argument these figures I takes a while
to adjust again it's because an American
our notion of what's taking place in
Europe
because I think but I found every one of
these things shocking by 25th I'm taking
these from your book by 2015 more
British Muslims were fighting for Isis
than for the British Armed Forces by
2016 the most popular boys name in
England and Wales Mohammed mm-hmm by the
middle of this century this is a
projection by the middle of this century
a majority of Austrians under the age of
15 will be Muslim and it is single digit
numbers of years ago that every one of
those was unthinkable correct yeah I
mean I smile because I mean I find it
you're used to it
I find it if I didn't laugh I'd cry I've
done the crying I mean the point about
her this is is that again all of these
things
you're meant to not notice you're meant
to not say it either
you're meant to say yeah okay so
Mohammed HAP's happens to be the most
popular boy then what are you saying
biggert what's wrong with that or they
find ways around it you know no no it's
it's just that we we counted the Harry's
in a different way that year and so on
all of these things there has been an
enormous cost that people have been made
to pay if they observe what's in front
of their eyes and so we get used to this
sort of just period of lying all right
and that's why we've been in what is the
or well it takes a great effort to see
what is under one's nose right alright
ii can cut concatenation again I'm
quoting you douglas at the same time
that we've had this influx at the same
time europe has lost faith in its
beliefs traditions and legitimacy Europe
is now deeply weighed down with guilt
for the past and there is also the
problem of an existential tiredness and
a feeling that perhaps for Europe the
story has run out and a new story must
be allowed to begin ok take us through
that a little nut the German war guilt
that's clear Britain seems to me to be a
gift so again I'm speaking as an
American what was the Churchill movie
that was just a big hit last year
we think of Britain's that Britain has
no apologies to make no reason to feel
guilty Neil Ferguson other people who've
looked at the British colonies it did
unbalanced its a transfer of human
capital right there not impoverishing
the people of Indians on the contrary I
might as well write and so why would why
would you include Britain Britain's the
hard case for to understand why Britain
should feel guilty yes or an existential
fatigue there's several things one is
the phenomenon that if if you or I were
just to sum up all people across say
Asia as having responsibility for the
same thing people who say that's mad I
mean you know you're not even picking
out the important distinctions you're
being very generalizing right but you
can do that with Europe so you say we
did the Holocaust in Europe you can even
get away with that in London
I'm sorry sorry we and then you take the
other one post colonialism which you
refer to post colonialism and post
colonial guilt is suffered in always
equal measure by for instance Britain
which undoubtedly ran quite a lot of the
world in the past and Sweden which did
not so there has there's a strange thing
that has emerged which I try to explain
in the book where we end up some summing
up ourselves by our collectively worst
moments the flip side of that is we look
at everyone else only by their best so
recent years for instance we've heard an
awful lot certainly since 9/11 about the
Islamic neo-platonists no one talks very
much by the Islamic neoplatonist until
this last twenty years but the Islamic
world is best represented by the Islamic
neoplatonist where the whereas Europe is
best represented by a schvitz well here
you get to one of the problems of this
is that we are uninformed yeah of course
and it formed all of its uninformed and
it's also imbibed by vast sways of the
public and told to them by a huge amount
of academics media politicians and
others it's a I mean there's several
reasons for that isn't there I mean one
is that you can
you can do that almost cost free as a
modern politician can't you it's like
the endless apologies for historical
acts it can gain you something but it
costs you nothing all you're doing is
selling out and misrepresenting the past
but you yourself might be able to polish
a bit of your halo or burnish your
reputation in some way but this is just
one element of this it's this thing I
describe as the sense of the story
running out a couple of people have said
and I'm very glad they pointed this out
that in some ways it's it's the most
original part of the argument of my book
the immigration bit is important and
people should know about it but this
second bit the arts bit what is it about
us that would mean this all happened not
many people have I think written about
and by the way I'm very disturbed about
this because almost none of my critics
and there are some sadly but almost none
of them pick up on this thing almost
nothing they go they go from me over the
immigration but they never pick up on
this but I have not to date had one
critic who said you're wrong on the
existential tiredness you're wrong on
that our best days are all ahead of us
any of that you don't I don't get any of
that and that's a disappointment because
rather hoping I would well alright so so
let's let's take a moment help me think
it through layman that I am that haven't
thought about this in any great detail
so what's the parallel what's the
parallel of peril I don't know a 5th
century Rome collapse of civilizational
self-confidence they could think of
course they could have kept the
barbarians out of the city but they
permitted the city to be sacked for
reasons that don't make any sense all
these years later and we get the same
you can see why Europe would would have
felt that the first world war was a
catastrophe second world wars in some
ways of reparation and in all the years
since the Second World War the Germans
have made this concerted effort to build
a good society right there's been
economic recovery of a cross of all
kinds and instead of feeling a sense of
pride and accomplishment
it's just exhaustion well why why the
why is is
is this almost everything is still
behind crime-scene tape
you mentioned World War one borders okay
I was in the Middle East's again
recently in the Middle East most
countries recognize borders to be a
prerequisite for peace if you don't have
borders you're in trouble
Europe thinks that borders are the cause
of war okay so that's just the beginning
of geography problems move on
we had Wars of Religion before we had
the wars of nation-states some people
forget that now but it means that
religion also is to the great extent
behind crime scene tape in the 20th
century was Europe that came up with the
two twin nightmares of fascism and
communism so we're very distrustful of
not just politics and political ideas
but the philosophy and possibilities
that might lead to them so it leaves you
in this position where absolutely
everything is still a crime scene and
you're trying to work out how it
happened and that's why whenever anyone
mentions something like orders Angela
Merkel and everybody else in any
position of power here's but the strong
borders would be a reason we go to war
again that's what we did then mention I
mean ideas for love this is why you're
a-peein I mean this is a terrible thing
to say for some philosopher friends but
European ideas to a great extent of
philosophy has become a game I'm not
saying it hasn't in America as well
hermeneutical game you know you can you
can look at the game but you can't play
it because you dint because you know
what you might go back to I described in
the book I had a sort of just terrible
moment of realization about this some
years ago a conference at Heidelberg and
I just realized every single idea was
off the tape not only the ideas the
words you couldn't say culture I was
almost meltdown when I did you can't use
anything because everything might make
us do it all again
well it's not surprising in that
situation that people would have a sense
of weariness is that a bit is that
something behind again you're having to
explain all this to an American but is
there some connection between the
and the drive toward a European Union
but somehow or other we can we can
escape our past if I reinvent we can
dissolve our identity we can dissolve
our historical identity we can wash away
our historical guilt in this new entity
there is that there's also by the way I
mean I was in Berlin again the other
week and the German audience member
pointed this out to me that there is
also the finger even in this stage the
Germans want to lead the way you know
they just want to they just want to
leave the way in masochism and more but
that that in the German instinct to
dominate even in the new era is
obviously still there and also the
European Union provides something to do
I mean I was having this debate a while
ago with the former Polish foreign
minister who who said yes we've got to
keep moving
EU has to keep moving it's got to have
purpose it's endlessly on words and on
words and my view is as a skeptic of
that particular project is how about
that it moves until the point to which
you lose the public for instance how
about that but but that's of course
that's so that's a mad xenophobic
British view of course all right you
have a new book coming out the book is
entitled the madness of crowds gender
race and identity and although you do
not I don't recall reading anything in
the book that suggests you were thinking
of it or you want readers to think of it
as the second in a in a kind of bookend
one does in many ways follow on the
other yeah at my judgement quote we are
going through a great derangement people
are behaving in ways that are
increasingly irrational feverish
herd-like
and simply unpleasant and you examine
the identity politics of gays women
racial minorities and trans yes and the
ways in which they're all mad yes
so Kay's quote the madness of crowds the
single factor that is most clearly
helped to change public opinion about
homosexuality in the West has been the
decision that homosexuality is in fact a
hardware rather than a software issue
close quote if that's extremely striking
when one's reading the book I explained
that I think this particular thing goes
through each of them like everyone I've
been trying to work
why people have become so unhinged in
recent years it's not just social media
I go into some of that in the book but
it's it's I think you go something like
this
we've tried to make the fruits of a
liberal ethical system into the
foundations of one okay yes sir
for instance gay rights of which gave
myself a supporter of gay rights I you
know think it's all good but it's it's a
great product of liberal rights it's a
it's a hideous foundation for them
same thing with for instance women's
rights great supporter of women's rights
very glad is it Sam glad we're here
rather than a hundred years ago but can
it be the basis of a moral system or an
ethical system one of the reasons why I
think we've being becoming deranged on
this is precisely as you mention this
hardware/software thing this the problem
is something like this
one of the few things we can all agree
on is we shouldn't be mean to people
because of something they can't help
right it's one reasons why we dislike it
when for instance somebody's rude about
somebody who's disabled or talking to
them about it it's a horrible thing to
do now things that people can possibly
affect where if your occurs a question
doesn't mean that we should be rude or
unpleasant or anything else but there's
a you're in different terrain so most
rights movements have moved towards this
thing of born this way the Lady Gaga
view all this way means not my fault nor
my fault crucially a counter to
lifestyle choice and I think lifestyle
choice is something worth countering on
this occasion but born this way says
nothing I can do about it so be nice and
this has been adopted recently by the
trans movement which says we are born
trans from childhood we're trans so be
nice
now I explained why this has happened
with trans it's fascinating I think but
at the same time we are making things
that are undoubtedly Hardware issues
gender sex into software so things we
know effects software meaning malleable
things and too much a personal will by
call
all environmental it's why the trance
issue by the way which is such a
minority of a minority issue has become
so huge because it's demanding two
things simultaneously it's saying
something that we're not sure about is
absolutely fixed and one of the very few
things we are sure about sex differences
for instance it's totally a choice you
could be a woman there this hour if
you'd like right and and that sort of
thing is de ranging for papi because
because it's asking us to take part in
something we know to be a lie and if
he's among other things enormous ly
demoralizing to people to be made to lie
and why should it be why should it be
that there is no it's a it's it's it
almost as though there's no cultural
immune system that's right
that what would have been what would
have been scoffed at laughed at single
digit number of decades ago what
certainly would not have been championed
by the BBC yeah now someone makes a
claim Douglas Murray would say but but
that but that's not so that you don't
have any scientific evidence to suggest
that at all and the trans says no no I
was born this way and you need to accept
it and within twenty seconds the BBC
that's in an official position why what
what happened what change what is why
what what eliminated the cultural immune
system to craziness is that in my being
too you know you're understating it Oh
forgive me
go ahead the first thing is all the
adults left the room that's a big
problem it became increasingly hard
secondly to hold concrete ideas up in
public people can sustain the most
extraordinary abstract idea as we see it
every day but they're finding it
extremely hard to hold onto concrete
ideas because the concrete idea can have
a personification right in front of you
in the age of social media so it's not
you're not talking about people in the
after that the person is there you're
talking about this person for instance
so it's rather like borders people find
it hard to hold onto the hard concepts
but there are a whole set of other
things as well one is and I think this
is absolutely crucial we
underestimate the move that has been
played by what was a very fringe
movement in academia that is now
absolutely rampant across America and
Europe which is sometimes called social
justice warrior is a sometimes called an
intersectional ism and so we didn't take
this very seriously but it should be
taken seriously in my view because it is
it is probably the single idea since the
Cold War ended that has made most
headway and which makes the largest
claims for itself it it is an attempt
this thing of this is why the endless
thing women gays race trans endless
injection of these things into every
single public discussion every political
discussion the fact that we had a we had
a defense secretary in Britain who had
to resign a couple of summers ago
because 15 years earlier he'd been found
to have touched the woman's knee and she
asked if he would take his hand off her
knee and he said yes of course and he
did but 15 years later he has to resign
the woman wasn't bothered at all as
journalists said you know told him I
smacked him in the face if he ever did
that again and but but this stuff is
sort of what the point is is everywhere
and and and the other thing sorry is
that it's it's even in you know people
people have been saying to me for years
oh but it's just you know it's a bit of
academia and you over focus on that it's
just you know some West Coast liberal
you know loopiness know almost every
multinational every corporate yes every
government that's right they are all
committed to this now the commitment to
being diverse being absolutely woke as
we call it on all of these issues and
the problem about it is I think it's
going to undo all the good that was done
and there's that there's there are some
very clear examples of that by building
resentment yes all right take your
obvious ones which I mentioned in the
research chapter it's taken what 50
years to move for Martin Luther King's
central moral insight about the nature
of somebody's character at being the way
you judge them not not some
characteristics color does not matter
right character
is all that's a Luther King jr. well
today not so there was a lecture given
the other week at Boston University from
an academic who is it George George
Washington University I think ya know
Washington State University
she gave election which she said people
who'd judge people by the content of
their character rather than their skin
color are dangerous skin color is meant
to be everything and like god we are
hurtling there it's a total inverse
total inversion alright question I'm
about a generation older than you are as
best I can work it out as I was coming
up the general feeling among sensible
people the general feeling was young
people go to university for four years
and yes yes yes of course the
universities are dominated by the
Liberals but the kids are smart enough
to figure that out and the moment they
leave University to get jobs they start
paying taxes they go through what people
have gone through for the the struggles
of forming families and so forth they
become quite sensible hmm and you're
saying maybe yes at one point maybe not
but for sure now the universities are
actually acting as transmission belts
yes for lunatic ideas across the rest of
the culture from universities to major
corporations to the media yeah it's it's
everywhere I mean and how did that
happen again
universities really did used to be it is
sort of it the crazy uncle it's all your
children there because they could avoid
the nonsense and you know humor them
right now they're dangerous well it goes
back to say I think there's an
extraordinary lack of courage in our
cultures at the moment the simple
courage to say what's true and this this
has an extraordinary effect because of
course it means that if you're weighing
up whether or not you should go with a
mob mentality a crowd a mentality or
something or not if there's basically no
benefit to telling the truth but there
could be a huge personal cost to it
you just weigh it up and is it worth
doing or not is it if you saw what
happened to Bret Weinstein at Evergreen
college who who refused to take part in
a racist endeavor that the college
wanted everyone to take part in which
was to make all white people leave
campus for the day if if you saw that he
and his family ended up being drummed
out not just of the University of a but
of town and you are another academic you
thought I'm not sure I want to go in
with this new era of race baiting that's
disguised as anti racism and you saw
what happened a Brit why would you do
what he did or not almost certainly not
and this isn't just because most
academics are carrots it's and most
people are most people aren't in a
position in their lives and their jobs
in their and so that's categories right
and that's why I say I mentioned them
somewhere in the madness of crowds that
I discovered when I was writing it from
a friend in the British Army that
there's a British Army device called the
great Viper which the American military
also has but it's it's it's a device you
you you pull on the back of a truck to a
minefield and you you fire this missile
it's got a long long rope at the back
filled with explosives in it falls
across the minefield very beautifully
and then explodes and it can't clear the
minefield as a whole but it can clear
enough room for trucks to cross and I
said that but the point of me writing
the madness of crowds was to be this
great Viper I want to try to clear a
path for other people to be allowed to
cross now of course the problem is I
don't know
my agent points out we don't know if you
survive that on the analogy may may be
unwise but but I think that's what
people need to do at the map we need to
we need to open up a path for sensible
people to be able to say things about
sex the relations between the sexes and
much more but we all knew until
yesterday yes from the madness of crowds
back to the strange death of Europe I
have a question that I want to ask but
I'm afraid to ask it because I'm I'm
sure that it's so hugely politically
incorrect far away all right all right I
will
this is just between the two of us show
the madness that you just described what
do Muslims make of this when they watch
all this their populations growing in
Africa or the Middle East is it I mean
the the the what comes across to us
every so often videos and so forth there
will be some and mom denouncing the West
is decadent but if decadence if cultural
decadence means anything right it means
something pretty close to what you're
describing yeah yeah experimenting on
children and yes yeah like making
everything sexual and yeah yeah of
course of course I mean well I always
think that but what I'm worried about is
that conservatives find themselves
edging toward the position of saying
well you know those Muslims have a point
oh yeah of course you can hear that
already in Europe I you know you can do
oh yeah you can hear a little bit um in
America as well yes it's it's not an
attractive route to go down it is enough
warning against it but my gosh you can
see people people doing it there was a
school in Birmingham in England earlier
this year where lots of the parents
protested outside of school because they
didn't want their children to be taught
about being gay in in classes to teach
the children about sex education
basically and I know quite a lot of
people including social conservatives
who said I don't know which side should
we be on and look it's if if a culture
pretends this is a consistent thing in
the strange death of Europe and the
madness of crowds if if a culture
pretends that it is this cheap
ridiculous highly sexualized race
obsessed totally evidently self
contradictory thing then it's hardly
surprising if it doesn't survive and it
doesn't particularly deserve to my own
view has always been that it's just
absurd to think
this is the some of what we've had and
that's that's the obscenity of this
really and that's that's why I also I
say at the end of the madness of crowds
I want young people in particular to get
fast ways out of this shortcuts out of
this madness how to how to just get that
out of your brain and get on to the life
you need to live and one of the things I
keep coming back to is that we should
have been asking this question much more
all on these years of saying compared to
what so if there is a Muslim protest
outside the kids primary school because
they don't want them to learn about gay
find out what it is they do want what it
is that they do want and if it is that
they want Saudi more is on these sorts
of things and punishments of then that's
as well to have that out because then we
can make a clear decision but this is
the case on all of them when people tell
us what a patriarchal and bigoted
society we live in and how terrible how
there's a war on women in the war on
gays the war on trans and a war on
blacks and one everybody and against
everybody else
compared to when compared to what
where's your place where's your Nirvana
because if you can't point to something
that's at least semi Nirvana like then I
see no reason why we should try this
wholly new experiment in reality what
the people do if you say compared to
what they tend to in your country as in
mine sort of reveal the foundations and
say you know Cuban health cares
particularly good and so on
you know actually literacy literacy
standards in communist Russia are very
very impressive you know so they give
away what they really want but that's
the point is if we keep saying compared
to what we know what we're running
against and we know what they're trying
to do and at the moment we're just in
this fog of not realising the
seriousness and the specific nature of
the attempts that are being made to
totally undermine rewrite and destroy
everything that I think people of any
political direction in our countries
would have thought of until recently as
at least a pretty good deal I'm happy to
say but sorry to say that you've given
me just another
very powerful I managed it okay
Douglas back to the strange death of
Europe again it's been two years since
you published the book a couple of
questions on the way things have been
going since I quote the book though to
begin with from the Treaty of Westphalia
in 1648 up to the late 20th century the
nation-state had generally been regarded
not only is the best guarantor of the
constitutional order and liberal rights
but the ultimate guarantor of peace yet
this certainty is also ended Central
European figures like Chancellor Kohl of
Germany in 1996 as long ago as 1996
insisted that and here you quote Kohl
the nation-state cannot solve the great
problems of the 21st century close quote
okay
but brexit and the and the recent
European elections discuss well brexit
was a an attempt by the British public a
majority the British public to reassert
their belief in the nation-state
I voted brexit like most of my fellow
countrymen and I did so I think for the
same reasons as most of them which is
that I thought we'd lost we'd lost our
understanding of how we were governed
and that this was absolutely central
it's one of the reasons why we've had a
pretty peaceful country Britain for some
hundreds of years Parliament was elected
by the people was accountable to the
people and if it let you down you
chucked them out and this wasn't so with
the European Union we felt and I know
lots lots of people who think very
differently to that but most of us in
Britain felt we didn't know how we were
governed we didn't know how to get rid
of them we didn't know who they were
once they were put there we didn't know
who put them there so the brexit vote
you'd say this is he from the point of
view of the argument in the strange
death of Europe this is a hopeful sign
the British public at least are not
remaining entirely supine well except
that I mean I was a huge part of the
brexit vote because losing control of
our borders was one part of the wider
loss of control people were clearly
objecting to but I say in the book in
advance of the BRICS
that just because you have national
autonomy does not mean that you might
not make the same route across decisions
I mean we were perfectly able under the
Blair government to have a appalling
relaxed immigration policy where 50,000
people are coming in every six weeks
which was the same numbers of Hyuga
noses came in and 1680s so you know the
numbers went up thanks to the labor
government and if you got a Labour
government like that again the numbers
would go up like that again and even a
Conservative government's basically not
being able to restrict the immigration
very much in the UK but yes the brexit
vote was some kind it was a shout of a
reassertion that we would like to be
governed in the way that we thought we
were governed alright Doug was the last
question actually let me give you a
quotation and then a little vignette let
me tell you a little story and then hand
it to you and the quotation again is you
again from the strange death of Europe
promised throughout their lifetimes that
the changes were temporary the changes
were not real or that the changes did
not signify anything Europeans
discovered that in the lifespan of
people now alive they would become
minorities in their own countries close
quote
now here's the little story I'll tell
you ages and ages ago when I was at
Oxford myself I knew Malcolm Muggeridge
the great British journalist and Malcolm
Muggeridge used to say that he often
used to say surveying what he even then
saw as the decline of the West used to
say that he felt himself in the same
position as a Roman in the fifth century
yes and he had a particular affection
for agustin in North Africa looking
across the Mediterranean at the decline
of the culture that he loved and hearing
about the sack of Rome and yet Augustine
cut led a good life as witnessed that he
comes down to us as st. Agustin
so the question is you've said this is
almost impossible to reverse
you've said that even this the political
movement the populist movement of the
recent years it's very complicated
unlikely to get it quite right so if
it's over Douglas if it's over if in
your lifetime it's over
how does Douglas Murray lead a good life
what is what is the definition what what
components of fighting back of
resignation do to the two to two
right-minded Europeans somehow or other
rear step establish some kind of analog
to the Benedictine monasteries where
these try to keep the person what will
constitute a good life if as you argue
it all just winds down my own view is
that it should should partly be done by
living the life that we thought to be a
good life until yesterday
we're very unlikely to come up with an
entirely new definition or invention
very unlikely that we're going to invent
new God's very unlikely we're going to
come up with new religions found like
you again we're sitting here in Florence
very unlikely again we all do anything
this good again so why don't we have the
recognition of what a good life was that
was very recognizable until yesterday
now that can't be done Roger Scruton and
I were talking about this recently this
time the great conservative philosopher
this this can't be done by government
diktat it can't be done because the
presence of the United States or the
Prime Minister of Great Britain says
that it should be so certain things they
could not do that might make it easier
but this just comes from people it comes
from individuals and people leading by
example I when I discuss many of the
things that came up in the strange death
of Europe sometimes people say to me you
seem well some people say but you know
you don't seem as het up about it
and that must mean that you know it's
over because otherwise you would be more
yes there's a different we fight fight
and resignation yes there's a difference
between those two and you work out don't
you as an adult
what its worth wasting yourself on and
what points you should keep making and
when you've made them enough and when
you've hit yourself your head against
that wall enough and you just have to
work it out and I've said everything I
can to try to warn my fellow countrymen
and Europeans and Americans and others
who've taken the book to heart of what I
think is happening but I don't intend
I've done my best shot at it and my own
view is that after that you have to live
the life that you ought to live in the
civilization you enjoy and you see
there's so many small the enjoyment
obviously isn't it one of the problems
one of the things I wish one could
communicate better to people is that all
the things that they think are excluding
people are not they're offering people
the best chance they'll ever have in
their lives to get to civilization or
civilization to get to them and when
people rail against things like this
city we're sitting in think that it
Pitta Mises capitalism and patriarchy
and races and more and more I just think
I wish more people could take the
attitude that I've taken throughout my
life to these things which is you don't
have to be tub-thumping you don't have
to be a wild flag waving patriot or
anything like that but your attitude
should be gratitude hmm I mean it's not
as if this is nothing the city we're
sitting in is enough for a whole
lifetime and a very very well lived
lifetime and it's all there all of the
literature the books the art the 4/4
music everything it's there and all you
have to do is to reach out and take it
and be part of it and that seems to me
in this culture of hatred and this this
thing I go into in demands of crowds of
this just endless zero-sum hatred and
bitterness and blame
just to turn that around and say how
about feeling grateful because what we
have is a blip in human history to have
the right to have and we would be so
damn stupid to give it away for nothing
Douglas Murray author of the strange
death of Europe and the madness of
crowds thank you thank you for uncommon
knowledge the Hoover Institution and Fox
Nation on Peter Robinson
[Music]
you